---
layout: post
title: MOPSS, 5th July 2025
date: 2025-07-03 13:22:00+0530
description: MOPSS Problems, Walkthroughs, Solutions from 5th July 2025
tags: MOPSS Pre-RMO IOQM RMO INMO MathOlympiad Notes Handouts LectureNotes
categories: MOPSS
jpdf: MOPSS25July05
jsujet: MOPSS
lnmo: true
giscus_comments: true
pretty_table: true
related_posts: false
---

{% include eg.html title="ProdFourConsInt" content="
  Determine if the product of some four consecutive integers
  can be equal to the product of a few consecutive primes.
" %}

{% include watru.html title="ProdFourConsInt" content="
  The product of any four consecutive positive integers is a multiple of $$ 4 $$.
" %}

{% include eg.html title="PerfectSqUsing06" content="
  Suppose we are given a positive integer, and any of its digits is equal to \\(0\\) or \\(6\\).
  Show that the given integer is not a perfect square.
" %}

{% include watru.html title="PerfectSqUsing06Watru" content="
  - Show that the last two digits of a square cannot be $$ 06 $$ or $$ 66 $$.
  - Conclude that the last two digits are equal to $$ 00 $$.
  - Use this argument repeatedly.
" %}

{% include eg.html title="BayAreaMO1999" content="
  ([Bay Area MO 1999 P1](https://www.bamo.org/archives/examfiles/bamo99draft.pdf))
  Prove that among any $$ 12 $$ consecutive positive integers,
  there is at least one which is
  smaller than the sum of its proper divisors. 
  (The proper divisors of a positive integer $$ n $$ are
  all positive integers other than $$ 1 $$ and $$ n $$ which divide $$ n $$. 
  For example, the proper divisors of $$ 14 $$ are $$ 2 $$ and $$ 7 $$.)
" %}

{% include watru.html title="BayAreaMO1999Watru" content="
  $$ 3, 4, \dots $$!
" %}

{% include rk.html title="PowersOf2PHP" content="
  Note that

  $$
  \begin{align*}
        2^2 & = 4, \\
        2^6 & = 64, \\
        2^5 & = 32, \\
        2^{25} & = 33554432
  \end{align*}
  $$

  holds.
  This shows that there are distinct powers of $$ 2 $$ whose last digits are equal,
  and that there are distinct powers of $$ 2 $$ whose blocks of last two digits are the same.
" %}

The above leads to the following problems.

{% include eg.html title="PowersOf2PHP" content="
  Are there two powers of $$ 2 $$
  such that the blocks of their last three digits are the same?
" %}

{% include watru.html title="PowersOf2PHPWatru" content="
  Apply the pigeonhole principle to all powers of $$ 2 $$, 
  considering their last three digits.
" %}

{% include eg.html title="PowersOf2PHP" content="
  Are there two powers of $$ 2 $$
  such that the blocks of their last $$ 2025 $$ digits are the same?
" %}

{% include rk.html title="" content="
  Observe that both of the integers $$ 3457, 7453 $$ leave a remainder of $$ 1 $$ when divided by $$ 9 $$.
  Note that

  - $$ 3000 $$ differs from $$ 3 $$ by a multiple of $$ 9 $$,
  - $$ 400 $$ differs from $$ 4 $$ by a multiple of $$ 9 $$,
  - $$ 50 $$ differs from $$ 5 $$ by a multiple of $$ 9 $$,
  - $$ 7 $$ differs from $$ 7 $$ by a multiple of $$ 9 $$,

  and hence $$ 3457 $$ differs from the sum $$ 3 + 4 + 5 + 7 $$ by a multiple of $$ 9 $$.
" %}

{% include eg.html title="PermDigitsMod9" content="
  Suppose we are given a positive integer. 
  We interchange its digits to form another integer. 
  Show that these two integers leave the same remainder when divided by $$ 9 $$.
" %}

{% include watru.html title="PermDigitsMod9Watru" content="
  Does the above remark help?
" %}

{% include eg.html title="" content="
  Note that $$ 3, 5, 7 $$ are three consecutive odd integers and all of them are primes.
  How many such examples of three consecutive odd integers are there such that all of them are primes?
" %}

{% include rk.html title="" content="
  Examples of three consecutive odd integers include 
  - $$ 11, 13, 15 $$,
  - $$25, 27, 29 $$,
  - $$ 37, 39, 41 $$.
" %}

{% include eg.html title="" content="
  Prove that if a prime number is divided by $$ 30 $$, the remainder is a prime or $$ 1 $$.
" %}

{% include eg.html title="InfinitudeOfPrimesSaidakEg" content="
  (Infinitude of primes, by Saidak)
  Let $$ a_1, a_2, a_3, a_4, a_5, \dots $$ be a sequence of integers such that 
  
  $$
  \begin{align*}
  a_1 & = 2, \\
  a_2 & = a_1 (a_1 + 1),\\
  a_3 & = a_2( a_2 + 1),\\
  a_4 & = a_3 (a_3 + 1), \\
  a_5 & = a_4 (a_4 + 1), \\
  a_6 & = a_5 (a_5 + 1)
  \end{align*}
  $$
  
  etc. holds, 
  that is, 
  for any positive integer $$ n $$, 
  
  $$
  a_{n + 1} = a_n (a_n + 1)
  $$
  
  holds. 
  Show that $$ a_n $$ has at least $$ n $$ distinct prime factors for any positive integer $$ n $$.
" %}

{% include watru.html title="" content="
  Check it for first few values to $$ n $$.
  Expect that **the pattern will continue!**
  Try to figure out what more to do to see/get convinced/prove/establish 
  that the pattern **does continue**.
  
  This is important since the statement that 
  
  > every positive integer $$ n $$ is smaller than $$ 1000 $$
  
  is true for first few values of $$ n $$! 
  However, *the pattern* 
  does **not** continue in this case. The **upshot** is that 
  observing a pattern does **not** guarantee its validity
  all throughout.
" %}

{% include watru.html title="" content="
  - Show that $$ a_n \geq 2 $$ for any integer $$ n \geq 1 $$. 
  - Note that the integers $$ a_n, a_n + 1 $$ have no common prime factor.
  - Conclude using induction.
" %}

{% include rk.html title="InfinitudeOfPrimesRk" content="
  This shows that the list of primes does not stop anywhere, 
  that is, there are infinitely many primes.
" %}

{% include eg.html title="" content="
  Show that for any odd prime number $$ p $$,
  the numerator of the rational number
  
  $$
  1 + \frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{3} + \frac{1}{4} + \dots + \frac{1}{p - 1}
  $$
  
  is divisible by $$ p $$.
" %}

{% include watru.html title="" content="
  Let $$ S $$ denote the above sum. Consider $$ 2S $$ and arrange the summands suitably.
" %}

{% include eg.html title="FourConseOneCopriToRest" content="
  Among any four consecutive positive integers,
  one of them is coprime to (that is, has no common factor with) the remaining three.
" %}

{% include watru.html title="FourConseOneCopriToRestWatru" content="
  Show that among any four consecutive positive integers, 
  at least one of the odd integers is not divisible by $$ 3 $$. 
  Consider the case when this odd integer is equal to $$ 1 $$, 
  and the case when it it greater than one. 
  In the second case,
  find a suitable prime divisor of this odd integer.
" %}

{% include pf.html title="FourConseOneCopriToRestPf" content="
  Note that among any four consecutive positive integers,
  at least one of the odd integers is not divisible by $$ 3 $$, 
  and hence, either it is equal to $$ 1 $$, in which case it is coprime 
  to the remaining ones, 
  or it is greater than one, and its smallest prime 
  factor is at least $$ 5 $$, 
  and hence, it is coprime to the remaining ones.
" %}

{% include eg.html title="ToTSpr2019JuniorOLevelP4" content="
  ([Tournament of Towns, Spring 2019, Junior, O Level, P4](https://www.turgor.ru/en/problems/40/spring-40-O-eng-auth.pdf)
  by Boris Frenkin)
  The product of two positive integers $$ m $$ and $$ n $$ is divisible by their sum. Prove that $$ m + n \leq n^2 $$.
" %}

{% include watru.html title="" content="
  Note that if $$ m + n $$ divides $$ mn $$, then $$ m + n $$ divides $$ n(m + n) - mn $$.
" %}

{% include eg.html title="" content="
  Show that a perfect square leaves $$ 0 $$ or $$ 1 $$ as the remainder upon division by $$ 4 $$.
" %}

{% include watru.html title="" content="
  Consider the squares of $$ 2n $$ and $$ 2n + 1 $$.
" %}

{% include eg.html title="" content="
  If an integer leaves a remainder of $$ 3 $$ upon division by $$ 4 $$, 
  then it cannot be expressed as a sum of two squares.
" %}

{% include watru.html title="" content="
  Use the above Exercise.
" %}

{% include eg.html title="" content="
  Is $$ 2025^{2025} $$ divisible by $$ 23 $$?
  If not, what would be the remainder when it is divided by $$ 23 $$?
" %}

{% include watru.html title="" content="
  Check that $$ 2025 \equiv 1 \pmod{23} $$.
" %}

{% include eg.html title="" content="
  Determine the remainder to be obtained when $$ 133^{133} $$  is divided by $$ 13 $$.
" %}

{% include eg.html title="" content="
  No integer that leaves a remainder of $$ 7 $$ upon division by $$ 8 $$
  can be expressed as a sum of three squares.
" %}

{% include watru.html title="" content="
  Try to read the squares modulo $$ 8 $$.
" %}

{% include eg.html title="ToTFall2019JuniorOLevelP4" content="
  ([Tournament of Towns, Fall 2019, Junior, O Level, P4](https://www.turgor.ru/en/problems/41/fall-41-O-eng-sol.pdf),
  by Boris Frenkin)
  There are given $$ 1000 $$ integers $$ a_1, \dots, a_{1000} $$.
  Their squares $$ a_1^2, \dots, a_{1000}^2 $$ are written along 
  the circumference of a circle. 
  It so happened that the sum of any $$ 41 $$ consecutive numbers on this circle is a multiple of $$ 41^2 $$.
  Is it necessarily true that every integer $$ a_1, \dots, a_{1000} $$ is a multiple of $$ 41 $$?
" %}

{% include rk.html title="" content="
  Replace $$ 1000 $$ by $$ 10 $$ and $$ 41 $$ by $$ 7 $$, and work on the problem.
" %}

{% include eg.html title="RMO2017aP2" content="
  ([India RMO 2017a P2](https://olympiads.hbcse.tifr.res.in/olympiads/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/rmo2017.pdf), [AoPS](https://artofproblemsolving.com/community/c6h1525174p9137091))
  Show that the sum of the cubes of any seven consecutive integers
  cannot be expressed as the sum of the fourth powers of two consecutive integers.
" %}

{% include watru.html title="" content="
  Read it modulo $$ 7 $$!
" %}

{% include eg.html title="ChinaTST1995Day1P1Eg" content="
  ([China TST 1995 Day 1 P1](https://artofproblemsolving.com/community/c6h37595p234864))
  Find the smallest prime number $$ p $$ that cannot be represented 
  in the form $$ |3^{a} - 2^{b}| $$, where $$ a $$ and $$ b $$ are non-negative integers.
" %}

{% include watru.html title="ChinaTST1995Day1P1Watru" content="
  - Any prime smaller than $$ 41 $$ can be expressed as the absolute value of the difference of a nonnegative power of $$ 3 $$ and a nonnegative power of $$ 2 $$.
  - If $$ 41 = 2^b - 3^a $$, then $$ b \geq 3 $$ and hence $$ 3^a \equiv -1 \bmod 8 $$, which is impossible.
  - Assume that $$ 41 = 3^a - 2^b $$. Considering congruence modulo $$ 3 $$, show that $$ b $$ is an even positive integer. Reduce modulo $$ 4 $$ to show that $$ a $$ is even.
  - Write $$ a = 2x, b = 2y $$, and factorize $$ 41 $$. 
  - Conclude by obtaining a contradiction.
" %}

{% include eg.html title="RMO1998P2Eg" content="
  ([India RMO 1998 P2](https://www.isical.ac.in/~rmo/papers/rmo/rmo-1998.pdf), [AoPS](https://artofproblemsolving.com/community/c6h57950p355521))
  Let $$ n $$ be a positive integer and $$ p_1, p_2, \dots, p_n $$ 
  be $$ n $$ prime numbers all larger than $$ 5 $$ 
  such that $$ 6 $$ divides $$ p_1^2 + p_2^2 + \dots + p_n^2 $$. 
  Prove that $$ 6 $$ divides $$ n $$.
" %}

{% include watru.html title="RMO1998P2Watru" content="
  Observe that any prime larger than $$ 5 $$ is congruent to $$ \pm 1 $$ modulo $$ 6 $$.
" %}

{% include eg.html title="RMO2023aP2" content="
([India RMO 2023a P2](https://olympiads.hbcse.tifr.res.in/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/KV-n-JNV.pdf), [AoPS](https://artofproblemsolving.com/community/c6h3186940p29056544))
Given a prime number $$ p $$ such that $$ 2p $$ is equal to the sum of the squares of 
some four consecutive positive integers. Prove that $$ p-7 $$ is divisible by $$ 36 $$.
" %}

{% include watru.html title="RMO2023aP2Watru" content="
  Show that the sum of four consecutive squares is congruent to $$ 6 $$ modulo $$ 8 $$, 
  and conclude that $$ p \equiv 3 \bmod 4 $$.
  Considering congruence conditions modulo $$ 3 $$, 
  prove that the smallest of the four consecutive numbers is a multiple of $$ 3 $$.
  Deduce that the sum of the four consecutive squares is $$ 5 $$ modulo $$ 9 $$.
" %}

{% include eg.html title="RMO2023bP1" content="
  ([India RMO 2023b P1](https://olympiads.hbcse.tifr.res.in/wp-content/uploads/2023/11/NonKV-or-Non-JNV.pdf), [AoPS](https://artofproblemsolving.com/community/c6h3186902p29056200))
  Let $$ \mathbb{N} $$ be the set of all positive integers and 
  
  $$
  S=\left\{(a, b, c, d) \in \mathbb{N}^4: a^2+b^2+c^2=d^2\right\}.
  $$
  
  Find the largest positive integer $$ m $$ such that $$ m $$ divides $$ abcd $$ for all $$ (a, b, c, d) \in S $$.
" %}

{% include watru.html title="RMO2023bP1Watru" content="
  - Show that $$ (1, 2, 2, 3) $$ lies in $$ S $$, 
  and deduce that $$ m $$ divides $$ 12 $$.
  - Let $$ (a, b, c, d) $$ be an element of $$ S $$.
  Show that at least one of $$ a, b, c, d $$ 
  is divisible by $$ 3 $$, 
  and at least one of them is even.
  - Prove that if $$ d $$ is even, then at least one of $$ a, b, c $$ 
  is even, 
  and that if $$ d $$ is odd, then at least two of $$ a, b, c $$ are even.
  - Conclude that $$ m $$ is divisible by $$ 2 \cdot 2 \cdot 3 $$.
" %}

